# What Is Character Encoding?

- Character Set
  - character
- Coded Character Set
  - code point
- Character Encoding
  - byte

概念、核心、类别、范畴

| 概念                | 核心概念   | 类别                             | 范围     | 使用者     |
| ------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------- | -------- | ---------- |
| Character Set       | character  | 集合                             | Culture  | 人 类      |
| Coded Character Set | code point | 映射集合(character-->code point) | Math     | 规范制定者 |
| Character Encoding  | byte       | 映射集合(code point-->byte)      | Computer | 计算机     |


**Character Encoding**: A map scheme between **code points of a coded character set** and **sequences of bytes**.

**Coded Character Set**: **A character set** in which **each character** has an assigned **integral number**.

**Code Point**: **An integral number** assigned to **a character** in a coded character set. As of Unicode 6.1, introduced in January, 2012, Unicode code point values have a range from `0x0000` to `0x10FFFF`.

**Unicode**: A **coded character set** that contains all characters used in the written languages of the world and special symbols. As as Unicode 6.1, introduced in January, 2012, Unicode character set contains `110,181` characters.

The standard Unicode encoding is called UTF-32BE (Unicode Transformation Format - 32-bit Big Endian), which maps every Unicode character to a sequence of 4 bytes. For any given Unicode character, the UTF-32BE encoded byte sequence can be obtained by putting the character's code point integer number in the 4-byte binary format with the most significant byte listed first.

There are also other **character encodings** used on the **Unicode character set**, as described in previous chapters:

- UTF-32BE - The standard Unicode character encoding as mentioned above.
- UTF-32LE - Same as UTF-32BE, except that the least significant byte is listed first.
- UTF-16BE - Every Unicode character is mapped to a sequence of 2 or 4 bytes with the most significant byte listed first.
- UTF-16LE - Same as UTF-16BE, except that the least significant byte is listed first.
- UTF-8 - Every Unicode character is mapped to a sequence of 1, 2, 3 or 4 byte.

Java offers the following built-in classes to support Unicode character set, local language character subsets, and their encodings:

- `java.nio.charset.Charset` - Defined in the JDK document as "A named mapping between sequences of sixteen-bit Unicode code units and sequences of bytes. This class defines methods for creating decoders and encoders and for retrieving the various names associated with a charset. Instances of this class are immutable." The "Charset" class represents a particular character encoding defined a particular character set.
- `java.nio.charset.CharsetEncoder` - Defined in the JDK document as "An engine that can transform a sequence of sixteen-bit Unicode characters into a sequence of bytes in a specific charset."
- `java.nio.charset.CharsetDecoder` - Defined in the JDK document as "An engine that can transform a sequence of bytes in a specific charset into a sequence of sixteen-bit Unicode characters."
