# Java Language and Unicode Characters

<!-- TOC -->

- [1. Unicode Versions Supported in Java-History](#1-unicode-versions-supported-in-java-history)
- [Hello](#hello)
  - [Supplementary characters](#supplementary-characters)
  - [low-level APIs](#low-level-apis)
- [2. Java Class](#2-java-class)
  - [2.1. Unicode Related Class](#21-unicode-related-class)
  - [2.2. Unicode Encoding Class](#22-unicode-encoding-class)
- [3. 总结](#3-%E6%80%BB%E7%BB%93)

<!-- /TOC -->

## 1. Unicode Versions Supported in Java-History

**Unicode** has been supported in the Java language since its first release in 1996. Both Unicode and Java have evolved with multiple versions and releases since then. Here is a summary of which version of Unicode is supported in which Java releases.

```txt
Java version   Release date         Unicode version
------------   ------------         ---------------
Java 11        March 2018           Unicode 10.0
Java 10        September 2018       Unicode 8.0
Java 9         September 2017       Unicode 8.0
Java 8         March 2014           Unicode 6.2
Java SE 7      July 28, 2011        Unicode 6.0
Java SE 6      December 11, 2006    Unicode 4.0
J2SE 5.0       September 30, 2004   Unicode 4.0
J2SE 1.4       February 6, 2002     Unicode 3.0
J2SE 1.3       May 8, 2000          Unicode 2.1
J2SE 1.2       December 8, 1998     Unicode 2.1
JDK 1.1        February 19, 1997    Unicode 2.0
JDK 1.1.7      September 12, 1997   Unicode 2.1
JDK 1.1        February 19, 1997    Unicode 2.0
JDK 1.0        January 23, 1996     Unicode 1.1.5
```

From `JDK 1.0` to `JDK 1.4`, Java can only support Unicode code points in the range of `U+0000` to `U+FFFF`. Unicode characters in this range are called **BMP** (Basic Multilingual Plane) characters.

Starting in `J2SE 5.0`, support of Unicode code points in the range of `U+10000` to `U+10FFFF` was introduced in Java. Unicode characters in this range are called **supplementary characters**, implemented in Unicode 3.1 in 2001.

## Hello


### Supplementary characters

**Supplementary characters** are characters in the **Unicode standard** whose code points are above `U+FFFF`, and which therefore cannot be described as single 16-bit entities such as the `char` data type in the Java programming language.

### low-level APIs

The Java platform is being enhanced to enable processing of **supplementary characters** with minimal impact on existing applications. New low-level APIs enable operations on individual characters where necessary. Most text-processing APIs, however, use character sequences, such as the String class or character arrays. These are now interpreted as UTF-16 sequences, and the implementations of these APIs is changed to correctly handle supplementary characters. The enhancements are part of version 5.0 of the Java 2 Platform, Standard Edition (J2SE).

## 2. Java Class

### 2.1. Unicode Related Class

Designers of JDK 1.0 used the following **primitive types** **and built-in class types** to support Unicode **BMP** characters in very natural way:

**char** - A primitive type with 16-bit storage size, which is perfected designed to store the code point value of a single BMP character.

**java.lang.Character** - A built-in class that wraps a value of the primitive type char in an object. The `Character` class is perfectly designed to represent **a single BMP character** as an object. The `Character` class also provides some useful `static` methods for managing individual BMP characters.

> 作者有话说：java.lang.Character表示一个字符。

**java.lang.String** - A built-in class that wraps an array of primitive type char in an object. The `String` class is perfectly designed to represent **a sequence of BMP characters** as an object. The `String` class also provides some useful static and instance methods for managing a string of BMP characters.

> 作者有话说：java.lang.String表示一串字符。



Designers of J2SE 5.0 did not introduce any **new primitive types** and **built-in class types** to support **Unicode supplementary characters**. What they did was:

- Use the existing primitive type `int` to represent a single **supplementary character** by storing its **code point** value as is.
- Use the existing primitive array type `char[]` to represent a sequence of **supplementary characters** by one **surrogate char pair** per supplementary character.

The **surrogate char pair** of a supplementary character is really the `UTF-16BE` encoded char sequence of the **supplementary character**.

> surrogate char pair。我的理解是这样的：supplementary character需要用4个byte才能进行存储，而char的大小是2个byte，当要存储它，就需要使用2个char，称之为char pair。理想的情况下，存储supplementary character是使用一个4个byte的类型来存储，这个char pair就起到了替代（surrogate）的作用。

Using **UTF-16BE encoded char sequences** to represent **supplementary characters** does give **one main advantage** to the existing class type `String`: A `String` object can still be viewed as a **char sequence** that represent a sequence of any Unicode characters: BMP characters and/or supplementary characters.

If you are interested in why `J2SE 5.0` designers did not choose to add a new primitive type like `char32` to help support **supplementary characters**, read the article "Supplementary Characters in the Java Platform" by Norbert Lindenberg and Masayoshi Okutsu at [oracle.com/us/technologies/java/supplementary-142654.html](http://www.oracle.com/us/technologies/java/supplementary-142654.html).

### 2.2. Unicode Encoding Class

sun.nio.cs.UTF_8

Java offers the following built-in classes to support Unicode character set, local language character subsets, and their encodings:

- `java.nio.charset.Charset` - Defined in the JDK document as "A named mapping between sequences of sixteen-bit Unicode code units and sequences of bytes. This class defines methods for creating decoders and encoders and for retrieving the various names associated with a charset. Instances of this class are immutable." The "Charset" class represents a particular character encoding defined a particular character set.
- `java.nio.charset.CharsetEncoder` - Defined in the JDK document as "An engine that can transform a sequence of sixteen-bit Unicode characters into a sequence of bytes in a specific charset."
- `java.nio.charset.CharsetDecoder` - Defined in the JDK document as "An engine that can transform a sequence of bytes in a specific charset into a sequence of sixteen-bit Unicode characters."

Conclusions:

- From JDK 1.0 to JDK 1.4, Java can only support BMP (Basic Multilingual Plane) characters.
- From J2SE 5.0 (JDK 1.5) to any newer versions, Java can support the full range, `U+0000` to `U+10FFFF`, of Unicode characters.

- "Character" objects can not represent all Unicode characters any more. Store code points as "int" values represent Unicode characters.
- The "Character" class offers static utility methods to help Unicode character processing.

- The `length()` method on a "String" object returns the number of "char" elements used to store Unicode characters represented by the "String" object.
- The `codePointCount()` method on a "String" object returns the number of Unicode characters represented by the "String" object.
- The `toCharArray()` method on a "String" object returns the UTF-16BE encoded "char" sequence of Unicode characters represented by the "String" object.

- Non-ASCII characters can be represented as `\uXXXX` escape sequences follow the UTF-16 encoding rule in Java String literals.
- Non-ASCII characters can also be represented as UTF-8 encoding byte sequences follow the UTF-16 encoding rule in Java String literals. But the source code must be stored in UTF-8 encoding and compiled with the "-encoding UTF8" option.

## 3. 总结
